[documentation] Feedback from 8.20 release process (#19531)
coq/coq: dev/doc/release-process.md

## When the release managers for version `X.X` get nominated ##

> - [ ] Create a new issue to track the release process where you can copy-paste the present checklist from `dev/doc/release-process.md` (we recommend copy/pasting the "For each release" section for X.Y+rc1 and for X.Y.0, removing the useless entries in each copy).

Reviewer: It took me a while to understand this parenthesis. Maybe this will make it clearer.

```suggestion
- [ ] Create a new issue to track the release process where you can copy-paste the present checklist from `dev/doc/release-process.md` (we recommend duplicating the "For each release" section for X.Y+rc1 and for X.Y.0, removing the useless entries in each copy).
```

## On the branching date ##

- [ ] Merge the above PR and create the `vX.X` branch from the last merge commit before this one (using this name will ensure that the branch will be automatically protected).
- [ ] Set the next major version alpha tag using `git tag -s` (you can leave the tag message empty).  The `VY.Y+alpha` tag marks the first commit to be in `master` and not in the `vX.X` release branch (be careful about small `v` for branches and big `V` for tags). Note that this commit is the first commit in the first PR merged in master, not the merge commit for that PR. Therefore, if you proceeded as described above, this should be the commit updating the version, magic numbers and compatibility infrastructure.  After tagging, double-check that `git describe` picks up the tag you just made (if not, you tagged the wrong commit).
- [ ] Push the new tag with `git push upstream VY.Y+alpha --dry-run` (remove the `--dry-run` and redo if everything looks OK).

> - [ ] In the milestone, add to the description a line like `@coqbot: backport to v8.20 (move rejected PRs to: https://github.com/coq/coq/milestone/60)` (in case PRs must be backported to multiple (point releases) branches, something like `@coqbot: backport to v8.19 (move rejected PRs to: <url of current milestone for 8.20>); backport to v8.20 (move rejected PRs to: <URL of current milestone for 8.21>); ...`)

Reviewer: Maybe the part about the milestone and the backporting project should be moved above the part about the tag because, while the tag can wait without creating trouble, if the milestone description is not set as soon as the new branch is created, there is a risk of missing out some PRs that would be merged in the meantime.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand the part about having several backport directives. If we also write `backport to v8.19` inside the description of 8.20.1 milestone, this is bound to drive a lot of people crazy.

Author: I think the use case is rather the contrary: something tagged with milestone 8.19.3 should: backport to 8.19.3; backport to 8.20.1
@Zimmi48 is it the use case you have in mind, if yes, shouldn't we rather recommend when creating a milestone to add the "backport to <new_milestone>" to all still open milestone for minor versions of previous releases?

Reviewer 2: Oh, that makes a lot more sense when you word it that way!

Reviewer: Indeed, this has happened before that this was needed. And yes, @proux01 I think adding the recommendation you mentioned would be worthwhile. (There have also been cases before where milestones like this were created, but this step was forgotten, and because of this some backports were missed).

Author: @Zimmi48 done, if you're happy with it, feel free to assign and merge

> - [ ] monitor the [Release management project](https://github.com/orgs/coq/projects/11) in which coqbot will keep track of PRs to be backported (according to the previous command)

Reviewer: Cosmetic:

```suggestion
- [ ] Monitor the [Release management project](https://github.com/orgs/coq/projects/11) in which coqbot will keep track of PRs to be backported (according to the previous command)
```

## On the branching date ##

- [ ] Merge the above PR and create the `vX.X` branch from the last merge commit before this one (using this name will ensure that the branch will be automatically protected).
- [ ] Set the next major version alpha tag using `git tag -s` (you can leave the tag message empty).  The `VY.Y+alpha` tag marks the first commit to be in `master` and not in the `vX.X` release branch (be careful about small `v` for branches and big `V` for tags). Note that this commit is the first commit in the first PR merged in master, not the merge commit for that PR. Therefore, if you proceeded as described above, this should be the commit updating the version, magic numbers and compatibility infrastructure.  After tagging, double-check that `git describe` picks up the tag you just made (if not, you tagged the wrong commit).
- [ ] Push the new tag with `git push upstream VY.Y+alpha --dry-run` (remove the `--dry-run` and redo if everything looks OK).

> - [ ] Start a new [project](https://github.com/orgs/coq/projects/11/views/4) to track PR backporting. The project should have a `Request X.X+rc1 inclusion` column for the PRs that were merged in `master` that are to be considered for backporting, and a `Shipped in X.X+rc1` columns to put what was backported. A message to `@coqbot` in the milestone description tells it to automatically add merged PRs to the `Request ... inclusion` column and backported PRs to the `Shipped in ...` column. See previous milestones for examples. When moving to the next milestone (e.g. `X.X.0`), you can clear and remove the `Request X.X+rc1 inclusion` column and create new `Request X.X.0 inclusion` and `Shipped in X.X.0` columns.

Reviewer 3: this links to "8.20 board" but how is the new project created? Is it supposed to be a separate project from the current "release management" project (projects/11) or is it supposed to be some sub-thing of the "release management" project?

Author: Good question, no idea, @Zimmi48 ?

Reviewer: Sorry, I should not have waited so long to document this. The idea is to use a single release management project from now on.

The process is the following:

- Create a milestone.
- Add a description saying to which branch(es) its merged PRs should get backported. A simple case is `@coqbot: backport to v8.20 (move rejected PRs to: https://github.com/coq/coq/milestone/60).` A more complex case would look like `@coqbot: backport to v8.19 (move rejected PRs to: <url of current milestone for 8.20>); backport to v8.20 (move rejected PRs to: <URL of current milestone for 8.21>); ...`.
- As soon as a PR is merged in this milestone, the project field for its backporting status will be automatically created by coqbot (with standard values "Request inclusion", "Shipped" and "Rejected").
- You can use pre-existing views in the project to track PR backporting or create new views for new major releases (on the model of previous releases). This could also be automatically done by coqbot, but it isn't the case yet.
- If a PR status is changed to rejected without the milestone being changed first, then coqbot posts a comment to the PR and automatically changes the milestone to the "move rejected PRs to" milestone value.

Author: Thanks @Zimmi48 I tried to translate that in the PR, feel free to criticize

- [ ] Once the final list of features is known, in a PR on `master` to be backported, generate the release changelog by calling [`dev/tools/generate-release-changelog.sh`](../tools/generate-release-changelog.sh) and include it in a new section in [`doc/sphinx/changes.rst`](../../doc/sphinx/changes.rst).
  The script automatically reorders the entries to show first the **Changed**, then the **Removed**, **Deprecated**, **Added** and last the **Fixed**. Manual adjustement is still needed when multiple entries are combined in a single changelog file.
- [ ] Start a draft release summary taking inspiration from the previous one.
  The [`dev/tools/list-contributors.sh`](../tools/list-contributors.sh) script computes the number and list of contributors between Coq revisions. Typically used with `VX.X+alpha..vX.X` to check the contributors of version `VX.X`.
  Note that this script relies on [`.mailmap`](../../.mailmap) to merge multiple identities.  If you notice anything incorrect while using it, use the opportunity to fix the `.mailmap` file.  Same thing if you want to have the full name of a contributor shown instead of a pseudonym.

> Be sure the PR is not draft for better visibility and asks everyone in the dev team to contribute the main features and breaking changes sections before the final release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Be sure the PR is not draft for better visibility and ask everyone in the dev team to contribute the main features and breaking changes sections before the final release.
```

- [ ] Publish a release on GitHub with the PDF version of the reference manual attached. The PDF can be recovered from the artifacts of the `doc:refman-pdf` job from continuous integration. Also attach a `tar.gz` archive of the sources (to ensure a stable hash, you can copy the archive autogenerated by github when the release is published).
- [ ] If pinged by opam package providers in pull requests to [ocaml/opam-repository](https://github.com/ocaml/opam-repository), transfer any changes to opam packages required by opam-repository CI (such as missing dependencies) to the corresponding package definitions in the Coq repository.
- [ ] For X.Y+rc1, in a PR on `master` to be backported, generate the release changelog by calling [`dev/tools/generate-release-changelog.sh`](../tools/generate-release-changelog.sh) and include it in a new section in [`doc/sphinx/changes.rst`](../../doc/sphinx/changes.rst).
  The script automatically reorders the entries to show first the **Changed**, then the **Removed**, **Deprecated**, **Added** and last the **Fixed**. Manual adjustement is still needed when multiple entries are combined in a single changelog file.

>   Then one can basically copy and paste the previous changelog message, putting TODOs everywhere. Ensure the PR is not draft for better visibility and asks everyone to contribute the main features and breaking changes section in the interval between the RC and the final release.

Reviewer 2: Having this blob here does not make much sense to me. It is something that should be started much earlier in the process. Also, it is not specific to X.Y+rc, any X.Y.Z release needs its corresponding changelog PR to be merged in master too.

Author: Indeed, I tried to improve that.

- [ ] Set `is_a_released_version` to `false` (if you forget about it, you'll be reminded by the test-suite failing whenever you try to backport a PR with a changelog entry).
- [ ] Close the milestone.
- [ ] Publish a release on GitHub with the PDF version of the reference manual attached. The PDF can be recovered from the artifacts of the `doc:refman-pdf` job from continuous integration. Also attach a `tar.gz` archive of the sources (to ensure a stable hash, you can copy the archive autogenerated by github when the release is published).
- [ ] Ensure that someone is working on providing an opam package (either in the main [ocaml/opam-repository](https://github.com/ocaml/opam-repository) for standard releases or in the `core-dev` category of the [coq/opam-coq-archive](https://github.com/coq/opam-coq-archive) for preview releases.
- [ ] If pinged by opam package providers in pull requests to [ocaml/opam-repository](https://github.com/ocaml/opam-repository), transfer any changes to opam packages required by opam-repository CI (such as missing dependencies) to the corresponding package definitions in the Coq repository.

> - [ ] Cc `@ejgallego` to ensure that a release for [coq-serapi](https://github.com/ejgallego/coq-serapi) is available in `opam-repository` (typically, using `dune-release tag` and `dune-release`).

Reviewer: AFAIU, SerAPI is no longer maintained and thus no longer included in Docker-Coq images, therefore, this line can be removed. (Cf. https://github.com/coq-community/manifesto/issues/160)

Author: @erikmd do you confirm?

Author: @erikmd done that

- [ ] Cc `@proux01` to ensure that a `coq-bignums` opam package is available in [`extra-dev`](https://github.com/coq/opam-coq-archive/tree/master/extra-dev) or [`released`](https://github.com/coq/opam-coq-archive/tree/master/released), respectively.

> - [ ] Cc `@erikmd` to ensure that the necessary configuration is ready to release the Docker images in [`coqorg/coq`](https://hub.docker.com/r/coqorg/coq) (gathering `coq`, `coq-bignums`, and `coq-serapi` opam packages).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] Cc `@erikmd` to ensure that the necessary configuration is ready to release the Docker images in [`coqorg/coq`](https://hub.docker.com/r/coqorg/coq) (gathering `coq` and `coq-bignums` opam packages).
```

> - [ ] For X.Y+rc1, send an e-mail on coqdev + coq-club + the Coq announcement category on Discourse (coqdev@inria.fr + coq-club@inria.fr + coq+announcements@discoursemail.com) announcing that the tag has been set so that package managers can start preparing package updates (including a `coq-bignums` compatible version), after which library authors can safely start preparing compatible releases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] For X.Y+rc1, send an e-mail on coqdev + coq-club + the Coq announcement category on Discourse (coqdev@inria.fr + coq-club@inria.fr + coq+announcements@discoursemail.com) announcing that the tag has been set so that package managers can start preparing package updates and library authors can safely start preparing compatible releases.
```

- [ ] If pinged by opam package providers in pull requests to [ocaml/opam-repository](https://github.com/ocaml/opam-repository), transfer any changes to opam packages required by opam-repository CI (such as missing dependencies) to the corresponding package definitions in the Coq repository.
- [ ] Cc `@proux01` to ensure that a `coq-bignums` opam package is available in [`extra-dev`](https://github.com/coq/opam-coq-archive/tree/master/extra-dev) or [`released`](https://github.com/coq/opam-coq-archive/tree/master/released), respectively.
- [ ] Cc `@erikmd` to ensure that the necessary configuration is ready to release the Docker images in [`coqorg/coq`](https://hub.docker.com/r/coqorg/coq) (gathering `coq` and `coq-bignums` opam packages).
- [ ] For X.Y+rc1, send an e-mail on coqdev + coq-club + the Coq announcement category on Discourse (coqdev@inria.fr + coq-club@inria.fr + coq+announcements@discoursemail.com) announcing that the tag has been set so that package managers can start preparing package updates and library authors can safely start preparing compatible releases.

> - [ ] For X.Y.0, once OPAM and Nix packages are ready (and ideally Docker images), announce the release to Coq-Club and Discourse (coq-club@inria.fr + coq+announcements@discoursemail.com).

Reviewer: For consistency with the rest of the document:

```suggestion
- [ ] For X.Y.0, once opam and Nix packages are ready (and ideally Docker images), announce the release to Coq-Club and Discourse (coq-club@inria.fr + coq+announcements@discoursemail.com).
```

  + The MacOS packages should be signed with our own certificate.
  + The Snap package has to be built and uploaded to the snap store by running a [platform CI job manually](https://github.com/coq/platform/tree/2021.02/linux/snap/github_actions).
    Then ask a Platform maintainer with access to the store to publish the upload or give you access so that you can do it yourself.

> - [ ] Announce the release to Coq-Club and Discourse (coq-club@inria.fr + coq+announcements@discoursemail.com).

Reviewer: Probably the whole section "## This is now delegated to the platform maintainers" should be removed, because it is clearly not maintained by the people involved and is becoming seriously outdated.
